Intermediate tour: Properties chapter (#4608)
JetBrains/kotlin-web-site: docs/topics/tour/kotlin-tour-intermediate-properties.md

generated by the compiler to manage property access behind the scenes. These accessors use a **backing field** to store 
the actual property value.

Backing fields exist if either of the following is true:

* You use the default `get()` or `set()` functions for the property.
* You try to access the property value in code by using the `field` keyword.

> `get()` and `set()` functions are also called getters and setters.
>
{style="tip"}

For example, this code has the `category` property that has no custom `get()` or `set()` functions and therefore uses the
default implementations:

```kotlin
class Contact(val id: Int, var email: String) {
    val category: String = ""
}
```

Under the hood, this is equivalent to this pseudocode:

```kotlin
class Contact(val id: Int, var email: String) {
    val category: String = ""
        get() = field
        set(value) {
            field = value
        }
}
```
{validate="false"}

In this example:

* The `get()` function retrieves the property value from the field: `""`.
* The `set()` function accepts `value` as a parameter and assigns it to the field, where `value` is `""`. 

> Access to the backing field is useful when you want to perform additional logic in your `get()` or `set()` functions 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Access to the backing field is useful when you want to add extra logic in your `get()` or `set()` functions 
```

}
```
{validate ="false" kotlin-runnable="true" kotlin-min-compiler-version="1.3" id="kotlin-tour-properties-stackoverflow"}

To fix this, you can use the backing field in your `set()` function instead by referencing it with the `field` keyword:

```kotlin
class Person {
    var name: String = ""
        set(value) {
            field = value.replaceFirstChar { firstChar -> firstChar.uppercase() }
        }
}

fun main() {
    val person = Person()
    person.name = "kodee"
    println(person.name)
    // kodee
}
```
{kotlin-runnable="true" kotlin-min-compiler-version="1.3" id="kotlin-tour-properties-backingfield"}

Backing fields are also useful when you want to add logging, send notifications when a property value changes,
or use additional logic that compares the old and new property values.

For more information, see [Backing fields](properties.md#backing-fields).

## Extension properties

Just like extension functions, there are also extension properties. Extension properties allow you to add new properties
to existing classes without modifying their source code. However, extension properties in Kotlin do **not** have backing

> fields. This means that Kotlin doesn't provide default `get()` and `set()` functions automatically. You have to write them

Author: I shortened it as you suggested. WDYT?

You can think of extension properties working like a function that has only a single parameter: the receiver object.

For example, let's say that you have a data class called `Person` that has two properties: `firstName`, `lastName`.

```kotlin
data class Person(val firstName: String, val lastName: String)
```

You want to be able to access the person's full name without modifying the `Person` data class or inheriting from it.
You can do this by creating an extension property with a custom `get()` function:

```kotlin
data class Person(val firstName: String, val lastName: String)

// Extension property to get the full name
val Person.fullName: String
    get() = "$firstName $lastName"

fun main() {
    val person = Person(firstName = "John", lastName = "Doe")

    // Use the extension property
    println(person.fullName)
    // John Doe
}
```
{kotlin-runnable="true" kotlin-min-compiler-version="1.3" id="kotlin-tour-properties-extension"}

> It's important to note that extension properties can't override existing properties of a class.
> 
{style="note"}

Just like with extension functions, we use extension properties widely in the Kotlin standard library. For example,

> consider the [`lastIndex` property](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.text/last-index.html) for a `CharSequence`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
see the [`lastIndex` property](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.text/last-index.html) for a `CharSequence`.
```

```kotlin
class CachedStringDelegate {
    var cachedValue: String? = null

    operator fun getValue(thisRef: User, property: Any?): String {
        if (cachedValue == null) {
            cachedValue = "${thisRef.firstName} ${thisRef.lastName}"
            println("Computed and cached: $cachedValue")
        } else {
            println("Accessed from cache: $cachedValue")
        }
        return cachedValue ?: "Unknown"
    }
}

class User(val firstName: String, val lastName: String) {
    val displayName: String by CachedStringDelegate()
}

fun main() {
    val user = User("John", "Doe")

    // First access computes and caches the value
    println(user.displayName)
    // Computed and cached: John Doe
    // John Doe

    // Subsequent accesses retrieve the value from cache
    println(user.displayName)
    // Accessed from cache: John Doe
    // John Doe
}
```
{kotlin-runnable="true" kotlin-min-compiler-version="1.3" id="kotlin-tour-properties-delegated"}

This example:

* Creates a `User` class that has two properties in the header: `firstName`, and `lastName`, and one property in the

> class body `displayName`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
class body, `displayName`.
```

* Delegates the `displayName` property to an instance of the `CachedStringDelegate` class.
* Creates an instance of the `User` class called `user`.
* Prints the result of accessing the `displayName` property on the `user` instance.

Note that in the `getValue()` function, the type for the `thisRef` parameter is narrowed from `Any?` type to the object
type: `User`. This is so that the compiler can access the `firstName` and `lastName` properties of the `User` class.

### Standard delegates

The Kotlin standard library provides some useful delegates for you so you don't have to always create yours from scratch.
If you use one of these delegates, you don't have to define a `getValue()` and `setValue()` function because these are

> automatically provided by the standard library.

Reviewer: > If you use one of these delegates, you need to define getValue() and setValue() functions because the standard library automatically provides them.

#### Lazy properties

To initialize a property only when it's first accessed, use a lazy property. The standard library provides the `Lazy`

> interface to use as a delegate. To create an instance of the `Lazy` interface, use the `lazy()` function by providing it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
interface for delegation. To create an instance of the `Lazy` interface, use the `lazy()` function by providing it
```

with a lambda expression to execute when the `get()` function is called for the first time. Any further calls of the `get()`
function return the same result that was provided on the first call.

For example:

```kotlin
class Database {
    fun connect() {
        println("Connecting to the database...")
    }

    fun query(sql: String): List<String> {
        return listOf("Data1", "Data2", "Data3")
    }
}

val databaseConnection: Database by lazy {
    val db = Database()
    db.connect()
    db
}

fun fetchData() {
    val data = databaseConnection.query("SELECT * FROM data")
    println("Data: $data")
}

fun main() {
    // First time accessing databaseConnection
    fetchData()
    // Connecting to the database...
    // Data: [Data1, Data2, Data3]

    // Subsequent access uses the existing connection
    fetchData()
    // Data: [Data1, Data2, Data3]
}
```
{kotlin-runnable="true" kotlin-min-compiler-version="1.3" id="kotlin-tour-properties-lazy"}

In this example:

* There is a `Database` class with `connect()` and `query()` member functions. 

> * The `connect()` function prints a string to console, and the `query()` function accepts an SQL query and returns a list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `connect()` function prints a string to the console, and the `query()` function accepts an SQL query and returns a list.
```

* There is a `dataBaseConnection` property that is a lazy property.
* The lambda expression provided to the `lazy()` function:
  * Creates an instance of the `Database` class.
  * Calls the `connect()` member function on this instance (`db`).
  * Returns the instance.
* There is a `fetchData()` function that:
  * Creates an SQL query by calling the `query()` function on the `dataBaseConnection` property.
  * Assigns the SQL query to the `data` variable.

>   * Prints the `data` variable to console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Prints the `data` variable to the console.
```

* The `main()` function calls the `fetchData()` function. The first time it is called, the lazy property is initialized.
The second time, the same result is returned as the first call.

Lazy properties are useful not only when initialization is resource-intensive but also when a property might not be used
in your code. Additionally, lazy properties are thread-safe by default, which is particularly beneficial if you are working
in a concurrent environment.

For more information, see [Lazy properties](delegated-properties.md#lazy-properties).

#### Observable properties

To monitor whether the value of a property changes, use an observable property. An observable property is useful when
you want to detect a change in the property value and use this knowledge to trigger a reaction. The standard library provides

> the `Delegates` object to use as a delegate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `Delegates` object for delegation.
```

For example:

```kotlin
import kotlin.properties.Delegates.observable

class Thermostat {
    var temperature: Double by observable(20.0) { _, old, new ->
        if (new > 25) {
            println("Warning: Temperature is too high! ($old°C -> $new°C)")
        } else {
            println("Temperature updated: $old°C -> $new°C")
        }
    }
}

fun main() {
    val thermostat = Thermostat()
    thermostat.temperature = 22.5
    // Temperature updated: 20.0°C -> 22.5°C

    thermostat.temperature = 27.0
    // Warning: Temperature is too high! (22.5°C -> 27.0°C)
}
```
{kotlin-runnable="true" kotlin-min-compiler-version="1.3" id="kotlin-tour-properties-observable"}

In this example:

* There is a `Thermostat` class that contains an observable property: `temperature`.
* The `observable()` function accepts `20.0` as a parameter and uses it to initialize the property.
* The lambda expression provided to the `observable()` function:
  * Has three parameters:
    * `_`, which refers to the property itself.
    * `old`, which is the old value of the property.
    * `new`, which is the new value of the property.

>   * Checks if the `new` parameter is greater than `25`, and depending on the result, prints a string to console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Checks if the `new` parameter is greater than `25` and, depending on the result, prints a string to console.
```

Observable properties are useful not only for logging and debugging purposes. You can also use them for use cases like
updating a UI or to perform additional checks, like verifying the validity of data.

For more information, see [Observable properties](delegated-properties.md#observable-properties).

## Properties practice

### Exercise 1 {initial-collapse-state="collapsed" collapsible="true" id="properties-exercise-1"}

You manage an inventory system at a bookstore. The inventory is stored in a list where each item represents the quantity
of a specific book. For example, `listOf(3, 0, 7, 12)` means the store has 3 copies of the first book, 0 of the second,
7 of the third, and 12 of the fourth.

Write a function called `findOutOfStockBooks()` that returns a list of indices for all the books that are out of stock.

<deflist collapsible="true">
    <def title="Hint 1">
        Use the <a href="https://kotlinlang.org/api/core/kotlin-stdlib/kotlin.collections/indices.html"><code>indices</code></a> extension property from the standard library.
    </def>
</deflist>

<deflist collapsible="true">
    <def title="Hint 2">

>         You can use the <a href="https://kotlinlang.org/api/core/kotlin-stdlib/kotlin.collections/build-list.html"><code>buildList()</code></a> function to create and manage a list, instead of manually creating and returning a mutable list. The <code>buildList()</code> function uses a lambda with a receiver, which you learned about in earlier chapters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        You can use the <a href="https://kotlinlang.org/api/core/kotlin-stdlib/kotlin.collections/build-list.html"><code>buildList()</code></a> function to create and manage a list instead of manually creating and returning a mutable list. The <code>buildList()</code> function uses a lambda with a receiver, which you learned about in earlier chapters.
```

    return true
}

fun checkDatabase(): Boolean {
    println("Performing database health check...")
    return false
}

fun main() {
    val isAppServerHealthy by lazy { checkAppServer() }
    val isDatabaseHealthy by lazy { checkDatabase() }

    when {
        isAppServerHealthy -> println("Application server is online and healthy")
        isDatabaseHealthy -> println("Database is healthy")
        else -> println("System is offline")
    }
   // Performing application server health check...
   // Application server is online and healthy
}
```
{initial-collapse-state="collapsed" collapsible="true" collapsed-title="Example solution" id="kotlin-tour-properties-solution-3"}

### Exercise 4 {initial-collapse-state="collapsed" collapsible="true" id="properties-exercise-4"}

You're building a simple budget tracker app. The app needs to observe changes to the user's remaining budget and notify
them whenever it goes below a certain threshold. You have a `Budget` class that is initialized with a `totalBudget` property
that contains the initial budget amount. Within the class, create an observable property called `remainingBudget` that prints:

> * A warning when it is set to lower than 20% of the initial budget.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A warning when the value is lower than 20% of the initial budget.
```

> * A good news message when the budget is increased from the previous value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* An encouraging message when the budget is increased from the previous value.
```
